garalaṃ taralānalaṃ purastā-
jjaladherudvijagāla kālakūṭam |
amarastutivādamodanighno
giriśastannipapau bhavatpriyārtham ||1||
garalaṃ	poison
tarala-analaṃ	as molten fire
purastāt-	first and foremost
jaladhe:-	from the ocean
udvijagāla	emerged
kālakūṭam	(which was ) the Kaalkoota poison
amara-stutivād-modanighna:	pleased by the praises sung by the Devas
giriśa:-	Shiva
tat-nipapau	drank that
bhavat-priyārtham	to please Thee
First and foremost there emerged from the ocean the Kaalakoota poison which was like molten fire. The gods propitiated Shiva by singing hymns of praise to him. He then drank the poison to please Thee.
vimathatsu surāsureṣu jātā
surabhistāmṛṣiṣu nyadhāstridhāman |
hayaratnamabhūdathebharatnaṃ
dyutaruścāpsarasa: sureṣu tāni ||2||
vimathatsu sura-asureṣu	as were churning, the Devas and Asuras
jātā surabhi:-	was born (came out) Kaamadhenu (the divine cow)
tām-ṛṣiṣu nyadhā:-	to the rishis (Thou) gave her
tridhāman	O Lord of the three worlds!
haya-ratnam-abhūt-	the jewel of a horse (Uchchaishrava) emerged
atha-ibha-ratnam	then the great elephant (Airaavata)
dyu-taru:-	the celestial tree (Kalpaka)
ca-apsarasa:	and Apsaras (celestial nymphs)
sureṣu tāni	to the Devas (Thou gave) them
As the Devas and Asuras were churning, the divine cow Kaamadhenu came out.Thou gave it to the sages. O Lord of the three worlds! Then emerged the jewel of a horse (Uchchaishrava), then the great elephant (Airaavata), then the celestial tree (Kalpaka) and the Apsaras (divine damsels) appeared. Thou gave them to the gods.
jagadīśa bhavatparā tadānīṃ
kamanīyā kamalā babhūva devī |
amalāmavalokya yāṃ vilola:
sakalo'pi spṛhayāmbabhūva loka: ||3||
jagadīśa	O Lord of the Worlds!
bhavatparā	devoted to Thee
tadānīṃ	then
kamanīyā	enchanting
kamalā babhūva devī	Lakshmi Devi emerged
amalām-avalokya yāṃ	by seeing her pure form
vilola: sakala:-api	fascinated everyone was
spṛhayām-babhūva loka:	and agitated with desire became the whole world
O Lord of the worlds! Devoted to Thee, then the enchanting Lakshmi Devi emerged. Seeing her pure and perfect form everyone was fascinated and the world got agitated with desire.
tvayi dattahṛde tadaiva devyai
tridaśendro maṇipīṭhikāṃ vyatārīt |
sakalopahṛtābhiṣecanīyai:
ṛṣayastāṃ śrutigīrbhirabhyaṣiñcan ||4||
tvayi dattahṛdaye	having set her heart on Thee
tadā-eva devyai	then alone, by the goddess
tridaśendra:	Indra
maṇipīṭhikāṃ	a bejewelled throne
vyatārīt	gave
sakala-upahṛta-abhiṣecanīyai:	with the objects of consecration which were brought by all
ṛṣaya:-	the Rishis
tāṃ śruti-gīrbhi:-abhyaṣiñcan	consecrated her, also with Vedic hymns
The goddess who had set her heart on Thee was given a bejewelled throne by Indra. With the objects which everyone had brought, the sages consecrated her, while they sang Vedic hymns.
abhiṣekajalānupātimugdha-
tvadapāṅgairavabhūṣitāṅgavallīm |
maṇikuṇḍalapītacelahāra-
pramukhaistāmamarādayo'nvabhūṣan ||5||
abhiṣeka-jala-anupāti-	with the holy waters pouring
mugdha-tvat-apāṅgai:-	followed by Thy enamoured side glances
avabhūṣitā-aṅga-vallīm	her creeper like body was adorned
maṇi-kuṇḍala-pīta-cela-hāra-pramukhai:-	(and with) gem studded earrings, yellow silk robe and necklaces
tām-amara-ādaya:-anvabhūṣan	the gods adorned her further
As the holy waters were pouring on her, her creeper like body was adorned by Thy enamoured side glances. The gods further bedecked her with gem studded earrings, yellow silk robe and necklaces etc.
varaṇasrajamāttabhṛṅganādāṃ
dadhatī sā kucakumbhamandayānā |
padaśiñjitamañjunūpurā tvāṃ
kalitavrīlavilāsamāsasāda ||6||
varaṇa-srajam-	the wedding garland
ātta-bhṛṅga-nādām	having humming bees on it
dadhatī sā	holding she (Lakshmi Devi)
kuca-kumbha-manda-yānā	with a gait slowed by the weight of the pot like breasts
pada-śiñjita-mañju-nūpurā	with beautiful anklets making a pleasant sound
tvām	(towards) Thee
kalita-vrīla-vilāsam-	displaying a little coyness
āsasāda	approached
Lakshmi Devi holding a wedding garland having humming bees on it, approached Thee with a gait slowed down by the weight of her heavy breasts. As she walked, the beautiful anklets adorning her shapely feet spread a delightful sound and a touch of coyness on her face enhanced her beauty.
giriśadruhiṇādisarvadevān
guṇabhājo'pyavimuktadoṣaleśān |
avamṛśya sadaiva sarvaramye
nihitā tvayyanayā'pi divyamālā ||7||
giriśa-druhiṇa-ādi-sarva-devān	Shiva Brahmaa and other gods
guṇa-bhāja:-api-	though endowed with virtues
avimukta-doṣa-leśān	were not free from slight discrepancies
avamṛśya sadā-eva	finding that always
sarva-ramye	(Thou) perfect in everyway
nihitā tvayi-	put on Thee
anayā-api	by her also
divya-mālā	the divine garland
She realised that all other gods as Shiva Brahmaa and others though endowed with virtues, were not free from all defects. Thou who are perfect in every way, she put the divine garland on Thee.
urasā tarasā mamānithaināṃ
bhuvanānāṃ jananīmananyabhāvām |
tvadurovilasattadīkṣaṇaśrī-
parivṛṣṭyā paripuṣṭamāsa viśvam ||8||
urasā tarasā	by Thy bosom, quickly
mamānitha-ainām	(taking her) and honoring her
bhuvanānāṃ jananīm	the mother of the worlds
ananya bhāvām	who is devoted to no other than Thee
tvat-uro-vilasat-	on Thy bosom sporting
tvat-īkṣaṇa-śrī-parivṛṣṭyā	by the showering of her auspicious glances
paripuṣṭam-āsa viśvam	prosperity was every where
Lakshmi Devi, the mother of the universe, was immediately taken by Thee on Thy bosom giving her due respect and honor as she was solely devoted to Thee. Shining on Thy bosom she showered compassionate glances all around which brought prosperity to the whole world.
atimohanavibhramā tadānīṃ
madayantī khalu vāruṇī nirāgāt |
tamasa: padavīmadāstvamenā-
matisammānanayā mahāsurebhya: ||9||
ati-mohana-vibhramā	highly exciting and deluding
tadānīṃ	then
madayantī khalu	intoxicating indeed
vāruṇī nirāgāt	liquor emerged
tamasa: padavīm-	the source of all sins and vice
adā:- tvam-enām-	Thou gave her
ati-sammānanayā	with great honor
mahā-asurebhya:	to the great Asuras
Then the highly exciting, deluding and intoxicating liquor gushed forth. This, the source of sins and vices, Thou ceremoniously gave to the great Asuras.
taruṇāmbudasundarastadā tvaṃ
nanu dhanvantarirutthito'mburāśe: |
amṛtaṃ kalaśe vahan karābhyā-
makhilārtiṃ hara mārutālayeśa ||10||
taruṇa-ambuda-sundara:-	beautiful like fresh rain clouds
tadā tvaṃ nanu	Then Thou indeed
dhanvantari:-utthita:-	in the form of Dhanwantari emerged
amburāśe:	from the ocean
amṛtaṃ kalaśe vahan	nectar carrying in a pot
karābhyām-	with (Thy) two hands
akhila-ārtim hara	be pleased to remove all my ailments
mārutālayeśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
From the ocean, then, Thou emerged beautiful like a fresh rain cloud in the form of Dhanwantari holding in Thy two hands the pot of nectar. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Deign to remove all my ailments.